Hello again.
In this video, we are going to look at time outs and mutexes.
First, we are going to take a slight diversion into recursive mutexes. Sometimes you may run into
situations where you want to lock a mutex which is already locked, and generally you cannot do that.
The usual result will be that the program deadlocks.
C++ provides a recursive_mutex, which can be locked multiple times.
So you can just call the lock function and call it again. The mutex will not actually be unlocked until
you have done an unlock() call for every lock() call.
If you are not sure that you're going to be able to do that manually, then you can use lock_guard, a
unique_lock or scoped_lock to make sure that the mutex eventually gets unlocked.
And of course, you would give recursive mutex as the parameter type for the lock
guard or unique lock.
Usually when you think you want to use a recursive mutex, it means there is something wrong with the
design and you need to think a bit harder about your code.
But there are occasionally situations where it is useful.
I have got some code here, which is an extremely inefficient way to calculate a factorial. I am sure
you have all seen the basic recursive implementation where you have a factorial of n.
It calls the factorial of n minus one and multiplies the result by n.
And that factorial(n-1)
will call factorial(n-2) and multiply that by n minus one and so on.
If for some bizarre reason you want to calculate a factorial in a thread and lock the recursive calls, then
you would need to use a recursive mutex.
So here it is.
We have the recursive call.
And then we lock the mutex just before we call the function recursively. I am using a lock_guard here,
but whatever it is, there needs to be an unlock after the function returns.
And of course, we have the terminating condition. If the argument is one or less, then we stop recursing
and start returning and then all the locks will be unlocked.
I have also provided a main function, which is going to call this in two separate threads.
So let's see what happens.
Well, the first thread has run, and then it does these calculations with the lock and it starts returning.
So this is going to unlock, this is going to unlock and so on.
So there we are, we have done it all, with no deadlocks. If we had used a normal mutex... (remember to
change this one as well!)
There we are!
It all goes horribly wrong.
And the reason for that is that every time we call this function, we lock the same mutex and you can
only lock a mutex once.
So on to timed mutexes. We have seen with plain mutexes you can either lock(), in which case the
mutex will wait until the lock becomes available or else you can call try_lock(), which will return
immediately, even if the lock is not available.
There are timed mutexes. In fact, C++ has quite a zoo full of mutexes and things to do with mutexes,
so I'm just trying to introduce them gradually.
With a timed mutex, it has the try_lock() member function, which does not wait at all. It also has a
try_lock_for() member function, which will wait for a certain interval, for example, 500 milliseconds.
And a try_lock_until() member function, which will wait until a certain time point.
So, for example, 12 seconds past the minute.
And these have the same interface as try_lock(). If the lock is available, then it'll return true; if
it cannot get the lock, it will return false.
I have rewritten the program we used with try_lock().
This time it is using try_look_for() and I have given it a duration of 100 milliseconds.
The rest of the program is the same.
So we have task one which locks it and sleeps.
Task two, which tries to get the lock repeatedly. If it cannot get the lock, it tries again. And then
a main function, which starts these two threads.
So there we are.
The first thread locks the mutex, then the second thread tries to get it.
It cannot lock the mutex because the first thread has already locked it. And then it keeps trying every
hundred milliseconds and eventually the first thread will unlock the mutex and the second thread succeeds
in getting the lock.
This may all sound a bit familiar.
In fact, we have seen that unique_lock will provide this functionality for any mutex not just timed
mutexes.
So what is the point of having timed mutexes?
I suppose the reason is, if you want the functionality without the extra overhead of unique_lock, you
could use a lock_guard with a timed mutex.
There's also a global function, try_lock(). You can pass multiple mutexes to that.
It will try to lock them in the order that you pass them.
If it cannot obtain all the locks, it returns immediately and it will give you a return value, which
indicates which mutex caused the problem.
The index is zero based, so it is zero for the first argument, one for the second and so on.
And on success, confusingly, it returns minus one.
How do you get these timeouts? The chrono library provides several clocks which we can use for durations and time points.
There is a system clock which will return whatever time the operating system thinks it is.
There are things like leap seconds which can cause the system clock to jump ahead by two seconds occasionally.
Usually on New Year's Eve when nobody is noticing.
It is also possible that the system time could be changed, either because someone has changed it at the
console or there's some kind of synchronization that keeps the time in sync with an atomic clock.
This will always return the correct time as far as the operating system is able to determine it.
So you should use that for time points.
There is also a steady clock, which, as the name suggests, it increases steadily. It does not go backwards,
unlike the system clock.
So this will always give a precise interval and we should use that for intervals.
One other thing to bear in mind is that try_lock for() and try_ lock_until() may not actually return
when you expect them to. They may be delayed by the scheduler if the scheduler is running something
else, or it thinks that your thread is not sufficiently important to be woken up just yet.
OK, so let's look at try_lock_until(). We are going to use the system clock.
And we are going to say that we have a deadline which is 90 milliseconds from now.
So system_clock::now() plus 90 milliseconds.
now() will return the current time. So then this thread is going to try the lock until the deadline.
If it fails, it will try again and it is going to keep on, missing these deadlines, until eventually it
gets the lock. The rest of the program is exactly the same.
So let's try that. So we get the same output.
The first task locks the mutex, the second task keeps trying to get it.
Eventually, the first task releases the lock and the second task can run.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time, but meanwhile, keep coding!